As with any linguistic change, an innovation might well begin in the mind of a single child during acquisition, but that is only ever part of the story of language change: it remains to be explained why a particular change catches on and spreads in a given speech community.
The question is whether any ``consensus'' among a group of children will develop as to how the terms should be specialized before one of the terms is lost completely (the other possible outcome for a doublet, according to Kroch).
We suggest the strong hypothesis that no child ever accepts two forms to have exactly the same function, whether word-forms or functional heads.
However, unless there is some salient dimension of use which the forms can be mapped onto, a speech community of acquirers will never converge on the same mapping of forms to functions such that the forms successfully specialize over time.
Thus, in order for specialization to occur successfully over time, there needs to be some particular dimension of use (e.g. lexical meaning or social structure) that is so salient that different speakers will converge on it by chance.
Once this dimension is found, the mathematical characteristics of the how the dimension of specialization is structured will determine various aspects of how the specialization turns out.
The simplest case is where the dimension of specialization is categorical, matching the categorical variation, and the number of salient categories in the dimension of specialization matches the number of variants involved in the linguistic variation. 
In that case, every variant can be specialized to one category.
Of course, many other types of dimensions are imaginable, and we will discuss a number of scenarios in the remainder of this article.
We begin with a few simple lexical synonyms below, but ultimately we will extend the hypothesis to abstract syntactic or phonological forms.


%At this point, maybe we should say more about the empirical basis for the PoC

%Cite Laurel

If everyone in a given generation comes up with a different interpretation of how the synonyms contrast, then the resulting pattern in the speech community will be a mixture of idiolectal interpretations.
The next generation will then likely be unable to pick out any particular pattern among the interspeaker variation in the input, and as this process is iterated over generations, the speech community will appear to exhibit free variation between the forms; no specialization of forms will occur.
One simple case of this type of variation is in the terms \textsl{cougar, mountain lion, puma}, and for some speakers, \textsl{panther} and \textsl{catamount}, for the species \textsl{puma concolor}.
While few speakers would call the same animal by all of these names, and some are region-specific, many speakers have 2-3 terms for the same feline.
And while speakers may have some intuition that the terms refer to different cats in some way, they may have so poor a sense of the difference that they cannot report any difference at all (as is the case for one of the authors of this article).
Until some of the terms drop out of use entirely in a particular speech community, different speakers may posit different interpretations, but the interpretations can differ (by chance) along so many possible dimensions of cat characteristics that a consensus is unlikely to develop in the speech community.
Ultimately we would expect a situation like this one to resolve with some of the terms dropping out of use, if any of the terms have any sort of evolutionary advantage over the others (e.g. if one were less marked phonologically).

Another possible case might be the variation between the terms \textsl{sprinkles} and \textsl{jimmies} in Philadelphia English, which both refer to ice-cream or cake toppings consisting of lots of tiny candies.
While speakers have a strong intuition that the terms have different referents, there is little or no consensus on what that difference is, and the words are largely overlapping in use.
The \textsl{jimmy}/\textsl{sprinkle} doublet may be an intermediate case, however, since some consensus has developed around the idea that \textsl{jimmies} are oblong while \textsl{sprinkles} are more nearly spherical, or at least other-shaped.
But the effect of color, taste, and mouth feel on the use of the two terms may still differ widely from speaker to speaker.
However, the fact that partial consensus has developed around a gross categorization of the set of candy toppings into two shape-based categories is perhaps a clue as to how the Principle of Contrast can come to assert itself.

If the referent of the two synonyms shows an obvious dimension on which it can be divided into a few categories (e.g. two or three, rather than 500), then it is likely that different speakers will arrive at the same specialization of the two terms in their idiolects by chance.
If different speakers in the speech community converge on the same interpretation often enough, then the next generation may be able to find a pattern of specialization to acquire.
If the pattern of use in the synonyms can be detected at all on the basis of the primary linguistic data, even if it is far from categorical, then the Principle of Contrast suggests that children will detect it and exaggerate it.
Once the pattern is strong enough that the next generation is able to take their parents' generation's distribution and make it even more bimodal in character, then the following generation will have an even stronger pattern to detect and try to match, and the trend to specialize should continue in the same direction over future generations.

Another simple word example of the latter situation is the historical doublet of \textsl{shirt} and \textsl{skirt}.
These have the same etymological ancestor, with the latter being borrowed into English from Old Norse \textsl{skyrta} (``shirt'', to the extent that the garment type can be deduced; \citealt{cleasbyvigfusson}), and were likely to have been synonymous or nearly synonymous, as far as we can tell based on their shared etymology and overlapping meanings in Middle English (cf. e.g. citations in the \textsl{OED}).
However, the two terms clearly specialized over time along two binary dimensions (not exactly simultaneously): upper garment vs. lower garment, male garment vs. female garment.
Both are obvious categorizations of clothing in human society, but neither was, to our knowledge, a component of the original meaning of the words.

In a similar way, while the feline words above don't naturally specialize along a particularly salient set of cat characteristics, their metaphorical uses referring to women have specialized in precisely this way (at least in the US): \textsl{cougar} for a woman over c. 40 years old dating a man in his twenties or late teens, and \textsl{puma} for a younger woman (e.g. 30s) dating a man in his twenties or late teens.
It is probably not an accident that while the terms for cats have been around in the relevant speech communities for longer without clear specialization, the dating-related versions have specialized quickly along a dimension with clear social significance.
Though as we will see later with other domains of specialization, since age is a continuous dimension, we would not expect the cut-off ages for these terms to be absolutely clear in the mind of any speaker.